README.md, before:

# ASQ-PHI: Adversarial Synthetic Queries for PHI

**ASQ-PHI** (Adversarial Synthetic Queries for Protected Health Information de-identification) is a benchmark dataset of **1,051 fully synthetic clinical search queries** designed to stress test HIPAA-compliant de-identification software.

This is the **first benchmark to test both safety (PHI removal) AND utility (clinical meaning preservation)** on search queries, targeting the "safe handoff" problem in clinical LLM workflows.

> **Important note:** All content is 100% synthetic. No real patient data were used.

---

## The Problem: Safe Handoff from HIPAA BAA LLMs

Large Language Models (LLMs) running inside HIPAA Business Associate Agreements (BAAs) can legally process Protected Health Information (PHI). However, when these LLMs need external tools like: web search APIs, Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers, medical databases, etc and any query crossing the BAA boundary **must not contain PHI**.

Current de-identification systems fail at this handoff because:

1. **PHI leakage**: Insufficient recall allows identifiers to slip through
2. **Over-redaction**: Systems trained on EHR notes aggressively scrub clinically essential information that is **not PHI under HIPAA Safe Harbor** (age <90, diagnoses, symptoms, medications)

### Example: The Age Problem

Many systems flag "18-year-old female" as PHI and redact the age, despite **age <90 being explicitly non-identifying under Safe Harbor**.

**Original query:**
```
Bleeding recommendations for 18-year-old female with iron deficiency anemia
```

**After over-aggressive de-identification:**
```
Bleeding recommendations for [AGE] female with iron deficiency anemia
```

**Result:** Clinically less usefull. Search returns less specific results for adolescent female specific guidance.

ASQ-PHI measures this utility-erosion behavior with **219 hard negative queries** containing zero PHI but mimicking PHI structure.

---

## Repository Structure

```
/
├── code/
│   ├── .env.example                     # Template for Azure OpenAI credentials
│   └── data_generation_pipeline.ipynb   # Notebook for generating ASQ-PHI
├── data/
│   ├── synthetic_clinical_queries.txt   # The core ASQ-PHI dataset (1,051 queries)
│   └── dataset_statistics.txt           # Metadata and distribution stats
├── figures/                             # Descriptive and validation figures (Figs 1-6)
│   ├── fig1_data_structure_example.png
│   ├── fig2_phi_type_distribution.png
│   ├── fig3_dataset_composition.png
│   ├── fig4_phi_density_distribution.png
│   ├── fig5_leakage_recall_baseline.png
│   └── fig6_overredaction_baseline.png
├── validation_results/                  # Baseline metrics for Amazon Comprehend Medical
│   ├── positive_metrics_by_threshold.csv
│   └── negative_metrics_by_threshold.csv
├── requirements.txt                     # Python dependencies
├── LICENSE
└── README.md
```

---

## Dataset Overview

### File Format

`data/synthetic_clinical_queries.txt` contains **1,051 clinical search queries** using a delimiter-based format:

![Data Structure Example](figures/fig1_data_structure_example.png)

**PHI annotations** follow HIPAA Safe Harbor categories: NAME, GEOGRAPHIC_LOCATION, DATE, MEDICAL_RECORD_NUMBER, HEALTH_PLAN_BENEFICIARY_NUMBER, PHONE_NUMBER, SOCIAL_SECURITY_NUMBER, EMAIL_ADDRESS, etc.

**Clinical context** (age <90, diagnoses like "COPD", medications, symptoms) is **intentionally not labeled as PHI** to enable over-redaction measurement.

### Composition

![Query Composition](figures/fig3_dataset_composition.png)

- **832 PHI-positive queries (79.2%)**: Contain 1-5 HIPAA identifiers (mean 3.57, median 4.0)
- **219 hard negatives (20.8%)**: Zero PHI, adversarial structure
- **2,973 total PHI elements** across 13 identifier types

![PHI Type Distribution](figures/fig2_phi_type_distribution.png)

**Top 3 identifier types:**
- GEOGRAPHIC_LOCATION: 826 (27.8%)
- NAME: 814 (27.4%)
- DATE: 806 (27.1%)

![PHI Density Distribution](figures/fig4_phi_density_distribution.png)

See `data/dataset_statistics.txt` for full distribution.

---

## Baseline Validation Results

We tested ASQ-PHI using **Amazon Comprehend Medical (DetectPHI)** across confidence thresholds (0.0 to 0.8). Results demonstrate severe recall-utility tradeoffs:

| Threshold | Recall | Leaked PHI | Over-redaction (Hard Negatives) |
|-----------|--------|------------|----------------------------------|
| 0.0       | 98.7%  | 47 elements | 90.0% |
| 0.3       | 96.8%  | 96 elements | 89.6% |
| 0.5       | 95.2%  | 143 elements | 88.4% |
| 0.8       | 88.1%  | 351 elements | 86.8% |

**Key finding:** Even at maximum sensitivity (threshold 0.0), the system leaks 47 PHI elements. At clinical utility-preserving thresholds (0.8), **351 PHI elements leak** while still over-redacting 86.8% of hard negatives.

![Recall and Leakage Baseline](figures/fig5_leakage_recall_baseline.png)

![Over-redaction Baseline](figures/fig6_overredaction_baseline.png)

These results characterize ASQ-PHI's difficulty and confirm it identifies edge cases not captured by EHR-trained models.

---

## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Reproducing the Dataset

To generate new synthetic queries using the same adversarial pipeline:

1. **Configure Azure OpenAI credentials** (copy `.env.example` to `.env`):
   ```bash
   AZURE_OPENAI_API_KEY_4o=your_key
   AZURE_OPENAI_ENDPOINT_4o=your_endpoint
   AZURE_OPENAI_DEPLOYMENT_4o=your_deployment
   ```

2. **Run the notebook:**
   ```bash
   jupyter notebook code/data_generation_pipeline.ipynb
   ```

3. **Customize for domain-specific variants:**
   - Edit the few-shot examples in the system prompt cell
   - Adjust PHI type distributions or density targets
   - Generate oncology-focused, cardiology-focused, or pediatrics-focused variants

---

## Use Cases

ASQ-PHI is designed for:

- **Healthcare AI developers**: Test de-identification layers before deploying LLM-powered clinical decision support with external tools
- **MCP server developers**: Validate HIPAA-compliant tool integrations for clinical LLM workflows
- **Web search API providers**: Benchmark PHI detection in real-time query filtering
- **Privacy researchers**: Develop and test novel de-identification algorithms on adversarial queries
- **Compliance teams**: Evaluate vendor claims about HIPAA-compliant external tool integrations

---

## Citation

If you use ASQ-PHI for benchmarking or research, please cite:

```bibtex
@dataset{weatherhead2025asqphi,
  title={ASQ-PHI: An Adversarial Synthetic Benchmark for Clinical De-Identification and Search Utility},
  author={Weatherhead, James},
  year={2025},
  publisher={Mendeley Data},
  version={V1},
  doi={10.17632/csz5dzp7nx.1}
}
```

**Mendeley Data:** https://doi.org/10.17632/csz5dzp7nx.1

---

## License

**MIT License.** This dataset is fully synthetic and open for academic and commercial use.

---

## Contact

**James Weatherhead**  
MD-PhD Student, Automated Science Track  
University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston  
jacweath@utmb.edu

---

## Acknowledgments

Dataset generated using Azure OpenAI GPT-4o. Baseline validation performed using Amazon Comprehend Medical (DetectPHI). All content is synthetic; no real patient data were used in creation or validation.

Commit message:

Clarify safe handoff from HIPAA BAA LLMs
Expanded explanation of the safe handoff issue regarding PHI and BAA compliance for LLMs, detailing the challenges faced when integrating external tools.

README.md, after:

# ASQ-PHI: Adversarial Synthetic Queries for PHI

**ASQ-PHI** (Adversarial Synthetic Queries for Protected Health Information de-identification) is a benchmark dataset of **1,051 fully synthetic clinical search queries** designed to stress test HIPAA-compliant de-identification software.

This is the **first benchmark to test both safety (PHI removal) AND utility (clinical meaning preservation)** on search queries, targeting the "safe handoff" problem in clinical LLM workflows.

> **Important note:** All content is 100% synthetic. No real patient data were used.

---

## The Problem: Safe Handoff from HIPAA BAA LLMs

Large Language Models (LLMs) running inside HIPAA Business Associate Agreements (BAAs) can legally ingest and process Protected Health Information (PHI) because all computation occurs inside the institution’s secure, BAA-covered environment. However, when these LLMs need external tools like: web search APIs, Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers, non-BAA knowledge services, or external medical databases, the model must send a query across the BAA boundary, and no PHI is permitted to cross that boundary under any circumstance. This creates a strict safe harbor barrier: inside the BAA environment, PHI is allowed; outside the BAA environment, even a single identifier makes the request non-compliant.

In practice, the BAA side typically runs Azure HIPAA-covered LLMs or on-prem models, which are usually older releases with fixed knowledge cutoffs and often 1–2 versions behind frontier models. These internal models have no live web access, so external retrieval requires crossing into a non-BAA environment that may contain MCP servers, web_search_api tools, or deep_research_api systems. These external endpoints operate on the live internet, are not HIPAA-constrained, and usually rely on frontier-class models that cannot legally receive PHI.

Current de-identification systems fail at this handoff because:

1. **PHI leakage**: Insufficient recall allows identifiers to slip through
2. **Over-redaction**: Systems trained on EHR notes aggressively scrub clinically essential information that is **not PHI under HIPAA Safe Harbor** (age <90, diagnoses, symptoms, medications)

### Example: The Age Problem

Many systems flag "18-year-old female" as PHI and redact the age, despite **age <90 being explicitly non-identifying under Safe Harbor**.

**Original query:**
```
Bleeding recommendations for 18-year-old female with iron deficiency anemia
```

**After over-aggressive de-identification:**
```
Bleeding recommendations for [AGE] female with iron deficiency anemia
```

**Result:** Clinically less usefull. Search returns less specific results for adolescent female specific guidance.

ASQ-PHI measures this utility-erosion behavior with **219 hard negative queries** containing zero PHI but mimicking PHI structure.

---

## Repository Structure

```
/
├── code/
│   ├── .env.example                     # Template for Azure OpenAI credentials
│   └── data_generation_pipeline.ipynb   # Notebook for generating ASQ-PHI
├── data/
│   ├── synthetic_clinical_queries.txt   # The core ASQ-PHI dataset (1,051 queries)
│   └── dataset_statistics.txt           # Metadata and distribution stats
├── figures/                             # Descriptive and validation figures (Figs 1-6)
│   ├── fig1_data_structure_example.png
│   ├── fig2_phi_type_distribution.png
│   ├── fig3_dataset_composition.png
│   ├── fig4_phi_density_distribution.png
│   ├── fig5_leakage_recall_baseline.png
│   └── fig6_overredaction_baseline.png
├── validation_results/                  # Baseline metrics for Amazon Comprehend Medical
│   ├── positive_metrics_by_threshold.csv
│   └── negative_metrics_by_threshold.csv
├── requirements.txt                     # Python dependencies
├── LICENSE
└── README.md
```

---

## Dataset Overview

### File Format

`data/synthetic_clinical_queries.txt` contains **1,051 clinical search queries** using a delimiter-based format:

![Data Structure Example](figures/fig1_data_structure_example.png)

**PHI annotations** follow HIPAA Safe Harbor categories: NAME, GEOGRAPHIC_LOCATION, DATE, MEDICAL_RECORD_NUMBER, HEALTH_PLAN_BENEFICIARY_NUMBER, PHONE_NUMBER, SOCIAL_SECURITY_NUMBER, EMAIL_ADDRESS, etc.

**Clinical context** (age <90, diagnoses like "COPD", medications, symptoms) is **intentionally not labeled as PHI** to enable over-redaction measurement.

### Composition

![Query Composition](figures/fig3_dataset_composition.png)

- **832 PHI-positive queries (79.2%)**: Contain 1-5 HIPAA identifiers (mean 3.57, median 4.0)
- **219 hard negatives (20.8%)**: Zero PHI, adversarial structure
- **2,973 total PHI elements** across 13 identifier types

![PHI Type Distribution](figures/fig2_phi_type_distribution.png)

**Top 3 identifier types:**
- GEOGRAPHIC_LOCATION: 826 (27.8%)
- NAME: 814 (27.4%)
- DATE: 806 (27.1%)

![PHI Density Distribution](figures/fig4_phi_density_distribution.png)

See `data/dataset_statistics.txt` for full distribution.

---

## Baseline Validation Results

We tested ASQ-PHI using **Amazon Comprehend Medical (DetectPHI)** across confidence thresholds (0.0 to 0.8). Results demonstrate severe recall-utility tradeoffs:

| Threshold | Recall | Leaked PHI | Over-redaction (Hard Negatives) |
|-----------|--------|------------|----------------------------------|
| 0.0       | 98.7%  | 47 elements | 90.0% |
| 0.3       | 96.8%  | 96 elements | 89.6% |
| 0.5       | 95.2%  | 143 elements | 88.4% |
| 0.8       | 88.1%  | 351 elements | 86.8% |

**Key finding:** Even at maximum sensitivity (threshold 0.0), the system leaks 47 PHI elements. At clinical utility-preserving thresholds (0.8), **351 PHI elements leak** while still over-redacting 86.8% of hard negatives.

![Recall and Leakage Baseline](figures/fig5_leakage_recall_baseline.png)

![Over-redaction Baseline](figures/fig6_overredaction_baseline.png)

These results characterize ASQ-PHI's difficulty and confirm it identifies edge cases not captured by EHR-trained models.

---

## Quick Start

### Installation

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### Reproducing the Dataset

To generate new synthetic queries using the same adversarial pipeline:

1. **Configure Azure OpenAI credentials** (copy `.env.example` to `.env`):
   ```bash
   AZURE_OPENAI_API_KEY_4o=your_key
   AZURE_OPENAI_ENDPOINT_4o=your_endpoint
   AZURE_OPENAI_DEPLOYMENT_4o=your_deployment
   ```

2. **Run the notebook:**
   ```bash
   jupyter notebook code/data_generation_pipeline.ipynb
   ```

3. **Customize for domain-specific variants:**
   - Edit the few-shot examples in the system prompt cell
   - Adjust PHI type distributions or density targets
   - Generate oncology-focused, cardiology-focused, or pediatrics-focused variants

---

## Use Cases

ASQ-PHI is designed for:

- **Healthcare AI developers**: Test de-identification layers before deploying LLM-powered clinical decision support with external tools
- **MCP server developers**: Validate HIPAA-compliant tool integrations for clinical LLM workflows
- **Web search API providers**: Benchmark PHI detection in real-time query filtering
- **Privacy researchers**: Develop and test novel de-identification algorithms on adversarial queries
- **Compliance teams**: Evaluate vendor claims about HIPAA-compliant external tool integrations

---

## Citation

If you use ASQ-PHI for benchmarking or research, please cite:

```bibtex
@dataset{weatherhead2025asqphi,
  title={ASQ-PHI: An Adversarial Synthetic Benchmark for Clinical De-Identification and Search Utility},
  author={Weatherhead, James},
  year={2025},
  publisher={Mendeley Data},
  version={V1},
  doi={10.17632/csz5dzp7nx.1}
}
```

**Mendeley Data:** https://doi.org/10.17632/csz5dzp7nx.1

---

## License

**MIT License.** This dataset is fully synthetic and open for academic and commercial use.

---

## Contact

**James Weatherhead**  
MD-PhD Student, Automated Science Track  
University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston  
jacweath@utmb.edu

---

## Acknowledgments

Dataset generated using Azure OpenAI GPT-4o. Baseline validation performed using Amazon Comprehend Medical (DetectPHI). All content is synthetic; no real patient data were used in creation or validation.
